1. Title: Gesture Phase Segmentation

2. Sources:

     (a) Creators: 
		Renata Cristina Barros Madeo (Madeo, R. C. B.)
		Priscilla Koch Wagner (Wagner, P. K.)		
            	Sarajane Marques Peres (Peres, S. M.)
        	{renata.si, priscilla.wagner, sarajane} at usp.br
                http://each.uspnet.usp.br/sarajane/

     (b) Donor: 
		University of Sao Paulo
		School of Art, Sciences and Humanities
		Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
		http://www5.usp.br/en/
			
     (c) Date: June, 2014


3. Past Usage:

   1.  Madeo, R. C. B. ; Lima, C. A. M. ; PERES, S. M. . Gesture Unit Segmentation using Support Vector Machines: Segmenting 
       Gestures from Rest Positions. In: Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC), 2013, Coimbra. Proceedings of the 28th Annual 
       ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC), 2013. p. 46-52.
       * In this paper, the videos A1 and A2 were studied.

   2.  Wagner, P. K. ; PERES, S. M. ; Madeo, R. C. B. ; Lima, C. A. M. ; Freitas, F. A. . Gesture Unit Segmentation Using 
       Spatial-Temporal Information and Machine Learning. In: 27th Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society Conference 
       (FLAIRS), 2014, Pensacola Beach. Proceedings of the 27th Florida Artificial Intelligence Research Society Conference 
       (FLAIRS). Palo Alto : The AAAI Press, 2014. p. 101-106.
       * In this paper, the videos A1, A2, A3, B1, B3, C1 and C3 were studied.

   3.  Madeo, R. C. B.. Support Vector Machines and Gesture Analysis: incorporating temporal aspects  (in Portuguese). Master 
       Thesis - Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo Researcher Foundation. 2013.
       * In this document, the videos named B1 and B3 in the document correspond to videos C1 and C3 in this dataset. Only 
       five videos were explored in this document: A1, A2, A3, C1 and C3.

   4.  Wagner, P. K. ; Madeo, R. C. B. ; PERES, S. M. ; Lima, C. A. M.. Segmentaçao de Unidades Gestuais com Multilayer 
       Perceptrons (in Portuguese). In: Encontro Nacional de Inteligencia Artificial e Computacional (ENIAC), 2013, Fortaleza. 
       Anais do X Encontro Nacional de Inteligencia Artificial e Computacional (ENIAC), 2013.
       * In this paper, the videos A1, A2 and A3 were studied.


4. Relevant Information:

   --- Gesture Phase Segmentation consists in a temporal segmentation of gestures, performed by gesture researchers in
       order to preprocess videos for further analysis. The description of gesture phase segmentation problem may be found 
       in MADEO et al. (2013a) and MADEO et al. (2013b).

   --- The dataset is composed by seven videos recorded using Microsoft Kinect sensor. Three different users were asked
       to read three comic strips and to tell the stories in front of the sensor. Using Microsoft Kinect, we have obtained:
       (a) a image of each frame, identified by a timestamp; (b) a text file containing positions (coordinates x, y, z) of
       six articulation points -- left hand, right hand, left wrist, right wrist, head and spine, with each line in the file
       corresponding to a frame and identified by a timestamp. The images enabled a manual segmentation of each file by a 
       specialist, providing a ground truth for classification.

   --- The dataset is organized in 14 files: 7 raw files and 7 processed files, one for each video which compose the dataset.
       The name of the file refers to each video: the letter corresponds to the user (A, B, C) and the number corresponds to 
       the story (1, 2, 3). The raw files contain the information obtained from Microsoft Kinect, described above. The processed 
       file contains vectorial and scalar velocity and acceleration of left hand, right hand, left wrist, and right wrist. These 
       measures were obtained after normalizing positions of hand and wrists considering the position of head and spine, and 
       using a displacement equal to 3 in order to measure velocity, as described in MADEO et al. (2013c).


5. Number of Instances: 

	A1 - 1747 frames
	A2 - 1264 frames
	A3 - 1834 frames
	B1 - 1073 frames
	B3 - 1423 frames
	C1 - 1111 frames
	C3 - 1448 frames


6. Number of Attributes: 

	Raw files (*_raw.csv): 	      18 numeric attributes (double), a timestamp (integer) and a class attribute (nominal).
	Processed files (*_va3.csv):  32 numeric attributes (double) and a class attribute (nominal).
	A feature vector with up to 51 numeric attributes can be generated with the two files mentioned above.


7. Attribute Information:

   Raw files:

   1. lhx - Position of left hand (x coordinate)
   2. lhy - Position of left hand (y coordinate)
   3. lhz - Position of left hand (z coordinate)
   4. rhx - Position of right hand (x coordinate)
   5. rhy - Position of right hand (y coordinate)
   6. rhz - Position of right hand (z coordinate)
   7. hx - Position of head (x coordinate)
   8. hy - Position of head  (y coordinate)
   9. hz - Position of head  (z coordinate)
   10. sx - Position of spine (x coordinate)
   11. sy - Position of spine (y coordinate)
   12. sz - Position of spine (z coordinate)
   13. lwx - Position of left wrist (x coordinate)
   14. lwy - Position of left wrist (y coordinate)
   15. lwz - Position of left wrist (z coordinate)
   16. rwx - Position of right wrist (x coordinate)
   17. rwy - Position of right wrist (y coordinate)
   18. rwz - Position of right wrist (z coordinate)
   19. timestamp - 
   20. phase: 
		-- Rest
		-- Preparation
		-- Stroke
		-- Hold
		-- Retraction

   Processed files:

   1. Vectorial velocity of left hand (x coordinate)
   2. Vectorial velocity of left hand (y coordinate)
   3. Vectorial velocity of left hand (z coordinate)
   4. Vectorial velocity of right hand (x coordinate)
   5. Vectorial velocity of right hand (y coordinate)
   6. Vectorial velocity of right hand (z coordinate)
   7. Vectorial velocity of left wrist (x coordinate)
   8. Vectorial velocity of left wrist (y coordinate)
   9. Vectorial velocity of left wrist (z coordinate)
   10. Vectorial velocity of right wrist (x coordinate)
   11. Vectorial velocity of right wrist (y coordinate)
   12. Vectorial velocity of right wrist (z coordinate)
   13. Vectorial acceleration of left hand (x coordinate)
   14. Vectorial acceleration of left hand (y coordinate)
   15. Vectorial acceleration of left hand (z coordinate)
   16. Vectorial acceleration of right hand (x coordinate)
   17. Vectorial acceleration of right hand (y coordinate)
   18. Vectorial acceleration of right hand (z coordinate)
   19. Vectorial acceleration of left wrist (x coordinate)
   20. Vectorial acceleration of left wrist (y coordinate)
   21. Vectorial acceleration of left wrist (z coordinate)
   22. Vectorial acceleration of right wrist (x coordinate)
   23. Vectorial acceleration of right wrist (y coordinate)
   24. Vectorial acceleration of right wrist (z coordinate)
   25. Scalar velocity of left hand
   26. Scalar velocity of right hand
   27. Scalar velocity of left wrist
   28. Scalar velocity of right wrist
   29. Scalar velocity of left hand
   30. Scalar velocity of right hand
   31. Scalar velocity of left wrist
   32. Scalar velocity of right wrist
   33. phase:
		-- D (rest position, from portuguese "descanso")
		-- P (preparation)
		-- S (stroke)
		-- H (hold)
		-- R (retraction)


8. Missing Attribute Values: None

9. Extra information:

       Gesture phase segmentation is a task with several inherent difficulties. First, it is a subjective task, since there
       is no clear point where a phase begins. Thus, different specialists may provide different segmentations for the same
       video. Also, some phases may present similar patterns, such as rest position and hold, where the hands remain paused.
       Finally, gesture phase segmentation has open issues among researchers, such as if the phases should be segmented 
       separatedly for each hand or if meaningless gesture -- such as touching the glasses while speaking -- may be considered
       for gesture phase segmentation.

       Also, it is important to consider that the gesticulation behavior may influence the performance of a classifier built 
       for gesture segmentation. Thus, it is important to highlight that videos A1 and A2 were recorded in the same session, 
       while video A3 was recorded in a different session, which may yield different gesticulation behaviour. 


10. References:

       Madeo, R. C. B. ; Lima, C. A. M. ; PERES, S. M. . Gesture Unit Segmentation using Support Vector Machines: Segmenting 
       Gestures from Rest Positions. In: Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC), 2013, Coimbra. Proceedings of the 28th Annual 
       ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC), 2013a. p. 46-52.       

       Madeo, R. C. B. ; Wagner, P. K. ; PERES, S. M.. A Review of Temporal Aspects of Hand Gesture Analysis Applied to 
       Discourse Analysis and Natural Conversation. International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology 
       (Print), v. 5, p. 1-20, 2013b.

       Madeo, R. C. B.. Support Vector Machines and Gesture Analysis: incorporating temporal aspects (in Portuguese). Master 
       Thesis - Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo Researcher Foundation. 2013c.